---
title: Debugging SASS with Chrome Dev Tools
date: '2014-03-17T02:39:09'
draft: false
categories:
- Code
- Web Development
tags:
- chrome dev tools
- compass
- sass
- sourcemap
author: George Spake
slug: debugging-sass-compass-chrome-dev-tools
description: Disclaimer, I got this to work but these are notes from my first attempt so some of this may be overkill. A lot of the information I found was over a year old so I’m probably using some work-arounds that are no longer necessary. I’ll be back to make corrections as needed. If you notice anything wrong please let me know in the comments. For the most official info check out Working with CSS Preprocessors on the Google developer pages.
---

![Screenshot of Chrome Dev Tools](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/sass-dev-tools.jpg)

_Disclaimer, I got this to work but these are notes from my first attempt so
some of this may be overkill. A lot of the information I found was over a year
old so I 'm probably using some work-arounds that are no longer necessary.
I'll be back to make corrections as needed. If you notice anything wrong
please let me know in the comments. For the most official info check out
[Working with CSS Preprocessors](https://developers.google.com/chrome-
developer-tools/docs/css-preprocessors#toc-how-css-source-maps-work) on the
Google developer pages_

I’ve been a Firefox loyalist for a while and I’m still a huge fan but it’s
become increasingly clear to me that Chrome DevTools is surpassing Firebug and
my full conversion to Chrome has been imminent for a while. A couple of days
ago, I broke down and installed
[RES](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/reddit-enhancement-
suite/kbmfpngjjgdllneeigpgjifpgocmfgmb?hl=en-US),
[ColorZilla](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/colorzilla/bhlhnicpbhignbdhedgjhgdocnmhomnp?hl=en)
and [ABP](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/adblock-
plus/cfhdojbkjhnklbpkdaibdccddilifddb?hl=en-US) in Chrome and decided to
really dive in to [Dev Tools](https://developers.google.com/chrome-developer-
tools/).

Today, after about an hour of trial and error, I was able to get SASS
debugging to work in Chrome. So, sorry Firebug, we’ve had some great times
together but I’m seeing someone else now.

Enough rambling. Here's my workflow:

I’m running a CentOS Vagrant box, generated by
[PuPHPet](https://puphpet.com/), in VirtualBox for Windows 8. My source is in
a local directory that’s mounted in my VM and I’m using PHPStorm to edit all
my files. I’m using [Foundation](http://foundation.zurb.com/) and
[Compass](http://compass-style.org/) to build a WordPress child theme based on
[Reverie](http://themefortress.com/reverie/) and I’d like to be able to debug
SASS in Chrome. (_Inhales deeply_)

### Compass Setup

In your guest, start by installing the compass gem:

    
    
    $ Gem install compass

_I’m using version 0.12.3_

You don’t need to install the SASS gem since compass installs it automatically
but you may need to update it. You’ll need to be running at least sass 3.3.0
for source maps to work. I’m running 3.3.3

You can run the following to check your version and update if you need to.

    
    
    $ gem list sass
    $ gem update sass

You’ll also need to install the compass-sourcemaps gem iso that the .map file
is generated along with your output.

    
    
    $ Gem install compass-sourcemaps --pre

_This is something I’m not totally sure about; I think there are efforts to
include this in compass without requiring an extra gem so you may not need
this. I’m going to come back and try doing this without it and update the post
later on._

In  my case, I already had a project directory so, instead of running a
command to set up a compass project, I just dropped a config.db file in my
child them directory (See below) . As you can see, I'm telling Compass to
watch the scss directory and output to the css directory. So, when I run `$
compass watch` from that directory, it's going to look at every .scss file in
the scss directory and output a .css file with the same name in the css
directory. The sourcemap options at the bottom ensure that a .map file is
output along with the any .css files. The
[sourcemap](http://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials/developertools/sourcemaps/)
is what chrome dev tools looks for to allow you to debug SASS in the browser.
You used to be able to use the SASS debug option but Chrome requires sourcemap
now.

config.rb file:

    
    
    # Require any additional compass plugins here.
    
    # Set this to the root of your project when deployed:
    http_path = "/"
    css_dir = "css"
    sass_dir = "scss"
    images_dir = "images"
    javascripts_dir = "javascripts"
    cache_path = "/tmp/.sass-cache"
    
    # You can select your preferred output style here (can be overridden via the command line):
    # output_style = :expanded or :nested or :compact or :compressed
    output_style = :expanded
    
    # To enable relative paths to assets via compass helper functions. Uncomment:
    # relative_assets = true
    
    # To disable debugging comments that display the original location of your selectors. Uncomment:
    #line_comments = false
    
    # If you prefer the indented syntax, you might want to regenerate this
    # project again passing --syntax sass, or you can uncomment this:
    # preferred_syntax = :sass
    # and then run:
    # sass-convert -R --from scss --to sass sass scss && rm -rf sass && mv scss sass
    
    # debug
    # sass_options = {:debug_info => true}
    
    #sourcemaps
    sass_options = {:sourcemap => true}
    enable_sourcemaps = true

Now you can run compass

    
    
    $ compass watch

You should see Compass polling for changes. If you edit a .scss file in the
scss directory, depending on whether or not there's already a css file output,
you'll either see Compass create a .css file in your css directory or
overwrite an existing one. If there isn't already a source map, you'll see a
message that one has been created.

If everything is set up properly, your scss should be outputting css and
you're halfway there.

### Chrome Setup

To get SASS working in Dev Tools, go to the general settings and check 'Enable
CSS source maps' and 'Auto-reload generated CSS.' Under the workspace
settings, click to add a folder and navigate to your local project directory;
in my case I just chose my main WordPress directory. I also went to
'chrome://flags/' and enabled dev tools experiments - _This may not be
necessary since I don 't think SASS support in dev tools is an experiment
anymore, but just to be safe._

Finally, if everything is in place, you should be able to see references to
your scss in Dev tools. Here's proof that it's working for me:

![Screenshot of Chrome Dev Tools](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/sass-dev-tools-1.jpg)

Hope this helps. If you want to debug SASS in Dev tools and this doesn't work
for you, I highly recommend putting in some time to Google around and get it
working. This is cool stuff and it's definitely worth the effort. I found a
lot of answers to problems I was having in this [Sourcemap
Support](https://github.com/chriseppstein/compass/issues/1108) issue on
GitHub. Some of that stuff might not be relevant anymore though. As I said,
I'll be back to make updates as needed; leave a comment if I got something
wrong.
