---
title: GiveCamp Memphis 2018
date: '2018-02-28T15:02:13'
draft: false
categories:
- Code
- Community
- Wordpress
tags:
- givecamp
- givecampmemphis
- memtech
author: George Spake
slug: givecamp-2018
---

This past weekend, Feb 23-25, the seventh annual GiveCamp Memphis event was
held at the Fedex Institute of Technology on the University of Memphis Campus.
“** _GiveCamp is a weekend-long event where technology professionals from
designers, developers and database administrators to marketers and web
strategists donate their time to provide solutions for non-profit
organizations”_** A dozen nonprofits and more than 80 volunteers made this the
largest GiveCamp Memphis yet.
<!--more-->
GiveCamp is a national event.**_“Since its inception in 2007, the GiveCamp
program has provided benefits to hundreds of charities, worth millions of
dollars of developer and designer time in services!”_**

GiveCamp is one of my favorite tech events in Memphis each year, not only for
the positive impact it has on Memphis, but for the opportunity it gives local
developers and designers to get together and work on real projects with real
value for these local organizations with limited time and budgets. It’s great
to see so many people learning, teaching, and contributing for a cause.

![](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/02/28165086_1725160374172054_7097554991350638178_o-1024x678.jpg)GiveCamp
Memphis volunteers work together to build software for local nonprofits (Photo
by Jim Sanders)

The nonprofits participating in this year’s event included Memphis Botanic
Gardens, Cooper Young Garden Club, Powered by Education, Delta Arts, Gilda’s
Club Memphis, People for the Enforcement of Rape Laws (PERL) Cancer Card
Exchange, Bridges, The Compost Fairy, Overton Park Conservancy, Clean Memphis,
and Community Legal Center. Some of the nonprofits returned for updates to
projects built at [previous
GiveCamps](https://georgespake.com/blog/givecamp-2017/).

What happens at GiveCamp stays at GiveCamp. By participating in GiveCamp, the
non-profits and volunteers agree that all volunteers work ends with the event.
To avoid burdening volunteers with any ongoing obligation, nonprofit reps are
not allowed to contact the volunteers directly once the weekend is over.
However, GiveCamp provides free longterm hosting and support to the nonprofits
through a dedicated help desk and organizers can reach out to volunteers
willing to provide maintenance support throughout the year.

In total, I spent around 29 hours on site at the event over the course of
weekend. While most volunteers choose to work on a single project, I tend to
move around and assist whoever needs help. I have a lot of experience with
WordPress and, since WordPress is used for so many of the projects, one of my
favorite parts of the event is helping everyone get WordPress set up and learn
their way around. For me, this event is just as much about the volunteers as
the nonprofits; it’s a great opportunity for everyone involved to learn and
network. I was excited to see such a great turnout this year, including a few
of my coworkers from AutoZone.

If you’re interested in learning more or participating in the event, visit
[givecampmemphis.org](http://www.givecampmemphis.org/)  
Check out pictures from the event on the
[GiveCampMemphis](https://www.facebook.com/GiveCampMemphis/) facebook page and
follow [@givecampmemphis](https://twitter.com/givecampmemphis) on twitter.

Thanks to the sponsors who made GiveCamp possible.

![](https://georgespake.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/givecamp-sponsors.png)
