---
title: GiveCamp Memphis Demonstrates How Vibrant Memphis&#8217; Tech Community Is
date: '2016-02-22T15:27:44'
draft: false
categories:
- Code
- Technology
tags:
- community
- cowork memphis
- givecamp
- memtech
author: George Spake
slug: give-camp-2016
---

![Volunteers develop software for non-profits at Give Camp Memphis 2016 -
Photo by Brad Montgomery](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/give-camp-developers-300x186.jpg)Volunteers develop
software for non-profits at Give Camp Memphis 2016 - Photo by Brad Montgomery

This weekend, [GiveCamp Memphis](http://www.givecampmemphis.org/)—a weekend-
long event where local developers and designers get together to build software
for non-profit organizations—was held at [CoWork
Memphis](http://coworkmemphis.com/) in Cooper Young. This marks the event's
sixth year and the second year I've had the honor of participating as a
volunteer. 

<!--more-->

Seven non-profit's, including [Volunteer
Odyssey](http://volunteerodyssey.com/), [The Overton Park
Conservancy](http://www.overtonpark.org/conservancy), and [Citizens to
Preserve Overton Park](http://www.overtonparkforever.org/), applied for help
and saw amazing results in the form of software developed for them by some of
the best software developers and designers in the city.

Volunteer Odyssey's mission is to "connect volunteers with their ideal
volunteer experiences and to tell those stories." A core component of that
mission is an interactive on-line [opportunity-
calendar](http://calendar.volunteerodyssey.com/) that was developed last year
at GiveCamp Memphis. This year, Volunteer Odyssey returned prepared with some
new feature requests based on feedback from the people who use the calendar.
The entire original team re-assembled to work on the project despite the fact
that one member was in China and one was in Japan; they were in the room all
weekend via video-conference. It's also worth noting that one of the star
developers on the team is only 17-years-old. All of the new requirements were
implemented beautifully—and then some—and the city is better for it. Countless
volunteer organizations and volunteers rely on this software—well, countless
until now: one of the new features that was added to the calendar this year
was comprehensive analytics that Volunteer Odyssey can use to track all sorts
of information about how the calendar is used.

Representatives for Citizens to Preserve Overton Park (CPOP) were interested
in developing an app based on a botanic study that was conducted in 2009 that
recorded all the plant life in Memphis' first park. Surprisingly, Overton Park
Conservancy (OPC), which had applied for help with a completely different
project, shared a similar interest and actually had some existing work that
could be used for the app. The result was a really [cool
app](http://gatesofmemphis.github.io/) that maps plant life in the park and
allows users to submit their own encounters through an existing open source
dataset. As a big fan of the park, seeing GiveCamp provide such an awesome
opportunity for CPOP and OPC to work together was a personal highlight.
GiveCamp delivered for OPC, as well; a new scheduling application will allow
the OPC to manage [reservations of park
amenities](https://overtonpark.givecampmemphis.org/)—its primary source of
income—paperlessly and much more effectively than before.

The team I was on worked with a non-profit organization called People for the
Enforcement of Rape Laws (PERL) to completely overhaul a WordPress site that
was originally built on an IPad. PERL is a "public policy, advocacy, and
communications organization dedicated to ending institutional practices that
effectively decriminalize sexual assaults, and on reforming the criminal
justice system to prevent further injustice." In addition to a [complete site
redesign](https://enforcerapelaws.org/) and with tons of enhancements and
optimizations under the hood, PERL got a new visual branding identity, with a
collection of new logos, and professional advice about content structure and
strategy. Prior to GiveCamp, the site owners had lost control of the site
hosting but we were able to clone the site and secure-hosting through
RackSpace is now being provided for free by GiveCamp. We also threw in
MailChimp and Google Analytics integration and training so the site
administrator can hit the ground running.

Other projects included a paperless gift card referral management system for
the [Cancer Card Exchange](http://www.cancercardxchange.org/p/referrals.html),
that will completely change how the program is managed; and a tenant
management system built for [Midsouth Sober
Living](http://www.midsouthsoberliving.org/).

As a volunteer, I enjoyed spending the weekend with other techies doing what
we all love for a good cause fueled by [great
food](https://twitter.com/georgespake/status/701194716977750016?lang=en) and
an endless supply of [candy, snacks, and
caffeine](https://twitter.com/georgespake/status/701113496675680256?lang=en).
The best part, though, was listening to the representatives from the non-
profits sharing their experiences during the final presentations. Each non-
profit was amazed by what had been accomplished in just a couple of days,
thrilled with the results, and grateful the software that will empower them to
better serve their purpose.

At the end an organizer mentioned that one of the challenges they faced is
bringing in applications from non-profits because it seems too good to be
true: How can we get custom software in a couple of days for free? What's the
catch?  
As one volunteer pointed out, "this is what we do for fun."

GiveCamp Memphis would not have been possible without these awesome Sponsors

[![rht](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/rht-300x68.png)](https://www.roberthalf.com/)
[![capital-c-logo](https://georgespake.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/capital-
c-logo.png)](http://capitalcschool.com/) [![MTF](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/MTF-241x300.jpg)](http://www.memphistechnology.org/)
[![rackspace](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/rackspace-300x85.png)](https://www.rackspace.com)
[![COWORK](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/COWORK-300x194.png)](http://coworkmemphis.com/)[![LogoSmallRedDotweb2003](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/LogoSmallRedDotweb2003.jpg)](http://www.epimemphis.com/)[![oobbq](https://georgespake.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/oobbq-300x172.png)](http://oneandonlybbq.com/)
[![PAAY-logo2](https://georgespake.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/PAAY-
logo2-300x101.png)](https://www.paay.co/)

If you are interested in other events like GiveCamp or you would like to find
out more about the local tech scene in Memphis, visit [Memphis Technology User
Groups on Meetup.com](http://www.meetup.com/memphis-technology-user-groups/)
or visit the [Memphis Technology Foundation
Website.](http://www.memphistechnology.org/)
