---
title: Want to be a Programmer? Find Mentorship Through Tech Communities.
date: '2017-07-05T04:06:04'
draft: false
categories:
- Community
- Technology
- Web Development
tags: []
author: George Spake
slug: mentorship-tech-communities
---

Finding my local tech community and participating in various open source
communities has been my single most valuable privilege in the context of my
career  and fueling my passion for web development. If I had to choose between
a master’s degree or all of the wisdom I’ve found and friends I’ve made from
talking to developers at user groups, conferences, and events over the past 5
years, I might hand over the degree.
<!--more-->
It’s also been a major part of my
personal life; if you’re passionate about what you do, there’s nothing that
compares to building relationships with others who share your passion and
learning from each other. Picasso said that when art critics get together,
they talk about art but when artists get together, they talk about where to
buy cheap paint thinner. That’s what tech community means to me.

Through my involvement in tech communities—first as a new guy in the back of a
user group meeting; then as a regular attendee of user groups, conferences,
and events; and finally as an evangelist, speaker, and organizer—I’ve been
fortunate to meet a number of people I consider mentors. Some of these people
I only see a few times a year; others are some of my closest friends. Through
little drops of wisdom and brief conversations, all have changed the way I see
my craft or how I approach learning and honing it.

I reached out to a friend when I first got a job in web development; and to my
panicked plea for advice about how to be a programmer he replied, simply, “be
a sponge”—to sponge up information and learn as much as I possibly could. It’s
simple but I still think it to myself all the time.

In the carpool on the way back from a JavaScript conference, one of our local
user group leaders encouraged me to read source code of the libraries and
frameworks I use, instead of only relying on blog posts, books, and
documentation. He also suggested, for the first time to me, that programming
is a superpower and that by learning new languages, patterns, frameworks, and
libraries, I could gain new ones.

Someone else, at that same JavaScript conference, recommended a
FrontendMasters workshop that has led to me watching over one hundred hours of
FrontendMasters material and developing a much deeper understanding of
JavaScript.

These sorts of encounters demonstrate how a little bit of guidance can have a
huge personal impact. Sometimes just hearing something from the right person
makes all the difference and I consider those people to be mentors.

## Being a mentee

Mentorship is not always a formal relationship; it often happens organically
and you might not even recognize it until later but it’s a powerful type of
relationship with the ability to shape both parties.  In all of these examples
I’ve listed, I was grateful for the guidance but at the end of the day, what
matters is what I did with it; my success is my responsibility, no one else’s.
I’ve found that the best advice in my life comes in the form of a seed that I
can either swallow or grow into something great. One of the keys to mentorship
is demonstrating that you can take those seeds and grow them in to fruit
trees. For the mentor, that’s the greatest reward—but it’s not until you grow
those trees that their anecdotal advice becomes mentorship.

During my time as a developer, I’ve seen others share my experience; they show
up with nothing, listen intently, follow every lead, and quickly grow in to
passionate programmers with enough knowledge and experience to give talks and,
of course, get jobs. I’ve seen others with all of the same potential ask lots
of questions but dismiss good advice; demonstrate an unwillingness to put in
the hard work and; tragically, forfeit the opportunity by driving away
potential mentors.

To reference the old saying “Give a man a fish, feed him for a day—Teach a man
to fish, feed him for a lifetime.” It’s not a mentor’s responsibility to hand
out fish. I’d also take the radical position that it’s not a mentor’s job to
teach you to fish; the most profound sort of guidance you can receive from a
mentor is the realization that you are capable of learning to fish and that,
in doing so, you can feed yourself. It’s on you to learn.

## Becoming the mentor

Having benefited so greatly from the generosity and wisdom of smarter people
around me, I feel an overwhelming urge to pay it forward and provide the same
benefit to others. To me, that means my role is to be the best I can possibly
be at my craft so, given the opportunity, I can point somebody in the right
direction. The cycle never ends and mentorship requires a drive for continuous
self-improvement. Mentorship inspires passion and excellence on both sides of
the relationship.

## Ok, Sold. Where do I Start?

Start with programmers you know. Ask them if they would be willing to talk to
you about what they do and offer advice about getting started. Check online
for user groups and conferences. User groups are usually free and open to
everyone; check meetup.com, facebook or google for user groups in your city.
(If you're in Memphis, visit the [Memphis Technology
Foundation](http://www.memphistechnology.org/) website.) If there aren’t any
user groups near you, there are online user groups and communities like [Nomad
PHP](https://nomadphp.com/). Tech conferences usually cost money and may
require travel but they’re worth it to meet and learn from real people. If the
cost is an issue, check with the organizers or your employer to see if there
are scholarship options. A lot of developers are on Twitter; follow them. See
what they’re working on, what books they’re reading, what conferences they’re
going to, what libraries they’re using (and, occasionally, what they’re pissed
off about). You can also follow and participate in discussions on Github where
a lot of decisions are made about the future of software that millions of
people use every day. Bringing this all back around to mentorship, the common
factor in all of these thing is seeking out peers and experts to connect and
learn from each other.

## An important call to action to non-“twenty something white dudes” and
anyone led to believe they can’t participate in this industry.

It’s no secret that the tech industry is disproportionately comprised of white
dudes. It’s in the news but I see it first-hand all the time and it’s
disheartening to say the least. I don’t think it’s fair to talk about my
experience without mentioning this but you can change it just by showing up.
Break the cycle.

When I got in to programming, I believed a lot of falsehoods about being a
programmer that have long been propagated, not necessarily by those aimed at
keeping people out, but by those who genuinely don’t understand what it means;
misconceptions like you have to be a genius who started coding at 6 years old,
or you have to have a computer science degree, or you have to be a certain
type of person to fit in. To that, I say “Pshh.” I've met all sorts of
programmers and some of the best I know started late or don't fit the cartoon
character tv programmer image. I’ve also met programmers with computer science
degrees and decades of experience who stopped learning long ago and lost touch
with their craft and the industry landscape. Don't let anyone convince you
this is an exclusive party.

The first time I went to a user group, I knew nothing and I had no idea what I
was walking in to or how I would be received but I was welcome and I learned
things at that meeting that I still use today. Just a few years later, I still
feel like a complete outsider with a lot to learn, but I’m also a full time
developer, user group organizer, and conference speaker. I want to see
everyone have that experience and, as someone on the inside, I believe these
inherently inclusive communities crave diversity and judge their members most
heavily on their willingness to better themselves. Get involved. Be a
programmer. Shape the communities; shape the industry.
